.TH AIS 1 "June 2026" "ais @VERSION@" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ais \- associative index: save values under keys, get them back by keys
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ais
.RB [ \-f
.IR DIR ]
.RB [ \-o ]
.IR KEY ...
.br
.B ais
.RB [ \-f
.IR DIR ]
.B \-v
.I VALUE
.RI [ KEY ...]
.br
.B ais
.RB [ \-f
.IR DIR ]
.RI [ KEY ...]
.B \-e
.br
.B ais
.RB [ \-f
.IR DIR ]
.B \-\-find
.I TEXT
.br
.B ais
.RB [ \-f
.IR DIR ]
.B \-\-doc
.RI [ KEY ...]
.br
.B ais
.RB [ \-f
.IR DIR ]
.B \-\-add
.I ID
.B \-v
.I VALUE
.br
.B ais
.RB [ \-f
.IR DIR ]
.B \-\-update
.I ID
.RI [ KEY ...]
.br
.B ais
.RB [ \-f
.IR DIR ]
.BR \-\-del | \-\-del-key | \-\-dump | \-\-keys | \-\-stats | \-\-timeline | \-\-tags | \-\-compact | \-\-export | \-\-import | \-\-import-interactively | \-\-sync | \-\-sync-folder | \-\-where | \-\-project | \-\-switch | \-\-indexes | \-\-forget | \-\-default | \-\-serve | \-\-init
.RI [ ARG ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ais
is a personal, plain-text associative index. A value (a URL, a path, or free
text) is filed under one or more keys; records are retrieved by the intersection
(default) or union of keys.
.PP
The grammar is flag-based so no tag is ever shadowed by a command: a
.B bare
word is always a KEY (get is the default action), a value to save is marked
with
.BR \-v ,
and a command is a
.BR \-\-word .
Thus
.B ais doc
gets the tag "doc", while
.B ais \-\-doc
is the command.
.PP
The store is append-only plain text and the index is navigable plain files, so
the whole index can be read, grepped, rsynced, and repaired by hand. Re-filing a
value already saved is idempotent.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-f " DIR"
Index directory, and the only way to point AIS at one explicitly (no env var).
With no flag, the index is located by precedence: the nearest
.I .ais/
at or above the current directory (like git), then the saved default in
.IR ~/.ais/config
(set with
.BR "ais \-\-default PATH" ),
then the built-in default
.IR ~/.ais ,
created on first use.
.TP
.B \-o
Get ANY key (union) instead of ALL (intersection).
.TP
.BI \-v " VALUE"
A value to save (save mode). Repeatable: extra
.B \-v
values attach to the same record (multi-link).
.B \-v \-
reads values from standard input, one per line. Keys are optional.
.TP
.BI \-k " KEY"
An explicit key, for a key that begins with
.RB ' \- '.
.TP
.BI \-p " KEY"
Default project key prepended to this save ('' = none); the persistent default is
set with
.BR "ais \-\-project KEY" .
.TP
.B \-i
Interactive save: standard-input lines are values, keys are prompted per line.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-encrypt
Store the value encrypted. The secret is read from the terminal with echo off
(or from standard input with
.BR "\-v \-" ),
never from
.BR \-v
on the command line, which would leak it to
.BR ps (1)
and the shell history; a passphrase is then prompted (twice). The value is
stored as a self-identifying
.B aisc:
marker. On a later recall at a terminal,
.B ais
detects the marker, prompts for the passphrase, and writes the cleartext to
.IR /dev/tty ;
when output is piped or redirected the marker is passed through opaque, so
.BR \-\-dump ", " \-\-find ", and sync carry it unchanged. No " \-d " flag is needed \(em"
decryption is automatic and interactive-only. With
.B \-\-doc
the whole document is encrypted to a blob file
.RI ( blobs/<ts>.aisc )
and the record stores an
.B aisc:@<path>
reference; deleting such a record
.RB ( \-\-del " / " \-\-del-key )
best-effort shreds the blob. Requires the crypto module
(see
.IR crypto/vendor-monocypher.sh ).
.TP
.B \-y
Assume yes for
.BR \-\-del / \-\-del-key / \-\-compact
(no prompt).
.TP
.B \-d
Debug tracing to standard error.
.TP
.BI \-\-token " TOKEN"
The one-time token printed by
.B "ais \-\-export \-\-serve"
(or
.BR "ais \-\-sync \-\-serve" )
on the other device; required by
.B "ais \-\-import <url>"
and
.B "ais \-\-sync <url>"
to authenticate and decrypt the LAN transfer.
.TP
.B \-h
Short usage.
.B \-\-help
prints full help with examples.
.B \-\-version
prints the version.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.RB [ \-o "] " KEY ...
(default) Get records filed under all, or with
.BR \-o
any, of the keys, as
.IR id | value .
.TP
.B \-v \fIVALUE\fR [\fIKEY ...\fR]
Save VALUE under zero or more keys (keyless is allowed; get it later by
.B \-\-find
or by tagging it).
.TP
.B \-\-find \fITEXT\fR
Get live records whose value contains TEXT (a plain substring).
.TP
.B \-\-add \fIID\fR \-v \fIVALUE\fR
Attach another value to record ID (repeat
.B \-v
for several).
.TP
.B \-\-update \fIID\fR \fIKEY ...\fR
Edit the keys of record ID: a bare KEY attaches, a
.B \-KEY
detaches it (the record keeps its id and value; detaching the last key leaves it
keyless). ID is the handle shown as
.IR id | value
by get,
.BR \-\-find ,
and
.BR \-\-dump .
A leading
.B \-KEY
must follow
.BR \-\- ,
e.g.\&
.BR "ais \-\-update 42 \-\- \-venice" .
A detached key is hidden at once and removed from the store by
.BR \-\-compact .
.TP
.B \-\-del \fIID\fR
Delete record ID.
.TP
.B \-\-del-key \fIKEY\fR
Delete every record filed under KEY.
.TP
.B \-\-doc \fIKEY ...\fR
Save standard input as a document: write it to
.I <index>/blobs/<timestamp>.txt
and save that relative path as a value under the keys. For multi-line or large
text. Blobs are named by local time, so
.I ls blobs/
lists your documents in chronological order.
.TP
.B \-\-dump
Print every record.
.TP
.B \-\-export
Write the merge stream (the
.BR A| / D|
lines) that
.B \-\-import
reads, so
.B "ais \-f A \-\-export | ais \-f B \-\-import"
merges A into B locally, with no network. With
.B \-\-serve
.RI [ PORT ]
it instead serves that stream to ONE peer over the LAN, end-to-end encrypted: it prints a
one-time token and the exact
.B \-\-import
command (URL + token) for the other device, waits for a single pull, then exits (default
port 8766).
.TP
.B \-\-keys
List all keys, sorted and distinct.
.TP
.B \-\-stats
Print counts of records, keys, and deleted records.
.TP
.B \-\-timeline \fR[\fIN\fR]
The
.I N
most recent records, newest first (default 500); a GUI pages through older ones on demand.
.TP
.B \-\-tags
Every key with how many records use it, busiest first.
.TP
.B \-\-compact
Reclaim space from deleted records.
.TP
.B \-\-import \fR[\fIURL\fR]
With no argument, read
.IR keys | value
lines (or an
.B \-\-export
merge stream) from standard input and merge each (the inverse of
.BR \-\-dump ;
blank lines and #-comments are skipped). Given a
.I URL
.RB ( http://HOST:PORT ,
from a peer's
.BR "\-\-export \-\-serve" )
and
.BI \-\-token " TOKEN"
, instead pull that peer's sealed merge stream over the LAN, decrypt, and merge it; a wrong
token or any tampering is rejected before anything is merged.
.TP
.B \-\-import-interactively
Like
.BR \-\-import ,
but confirm each
.IR keys | value
record first: it is shown and a
.RB [ y / N ]
answer is read from the terminal
.RI ( /dev/tty ,
or
.IR $AIS_TTY ).
Only
.B y
takes the record;
.BR N ,
the default and a bare Enter, skips it. Records arrive on standard input and the
answers on the terminal, so the two streams stay separate. For adopting selected
records from another person's shared index, or a curated
.IR keys | value
file (project knowledge across a workspace), without pulling in everything:
.RS
.PP
.nf
ais \-f OTHER \-\-dump | sed 's/^[0-9]*|//' | ais \-\-import-interactively
ais \-\-import-interactively < project-knowledge.txt
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-sync \-\-serve \fR[\fIPORT\fR]
Two-way LAN sync. This form hosts one peer (prints a URL, a one-time token, and a QR); the
other device joins with
.B \-\-sync \fIURL\fR \-\-token \fITOKEN\fR\fR.
Both converge in one round \(em a tombstone-union, timestamp last-writer-wins merge, blobs
included \(em unlike the one-shot
.B \-\-export \-\-serve
copy.
.TP
.B \-\-sync-folder \fIFOLDER\fR
Sync through a shared FOLDER instead of a live connection. One import+export pass: merge every
peer bundle already in FOLDER, then (re)write this device's own bundle
.RI ( <device-id> .aisb )
atomically. Point a background file mover (Syncthing, or a cloud drive) at FOLDER so the bundles
travel between devices, then run
.B \-\-sync-folder
on each device, repeatedly (e.g.\& on a timer); they all converge by the same tombstone-union,
timestamp last-writer-wins merge as
.BR \-\-sync ,
blobs included. Each device writes only its own id-named bundle, so devices never clobber one
another, and a cloned identity heals itself. Unlike
.BR \-\-sync ,
no two devices need be reachable at the same instant, so this is the set-and-forget,
cross-network path (the LAN
.B \-\-sync
is the live, both-here alternative).
.TP
.B \-\-init
Create a local
.I .ais
index in the current directory (then found from any subdirectory, like git).
.TP
.B \-\-where
Print the resolved index directory (e.g. to locate a blob file).
.TP
.B \-\-project \fR[\fIKEY\fR]
Show, set, or clear ('') the persistent default project key.
.TP
.B \-\-switch \fR[\fINAME\fR]
Switch the current index (several indexes, the git-branch way). No argument
prints the current name and its directory. The form
.B \-c
.I NAME
.RI [ DIR ]
creates a new index (DIR default
.IR ~/.ais\-NAME )
and switches to it. The reserved name
.B home
is the built-in
.I ~/.ais
and is always present;
.B \-\-switch home
returns to it. Indexes are separate stores, so switching only changes which one
you read and write; move records between them with
.B \-\-import
or
.BR \-\-import-interactively .
.TP
.B \-\-indexes
List the named indexes (one per line, a
.B *
on the current);
.B home
is always shown.
.TP
.B \-\-forget \fINAME\fR
Drop NAME from the registry (its data directory is left untouched). The current
index cannot be forgotten; switch away first.
.TP
.B \-\-default \fR[\fIPATH\fR]
DEPRECATED (use
.BR \-\-switch ).
The legacy single saved default in
.IR ~/.ais/config ,
honoured only when no
.B current
named index is set.
.TP
.B \-\-serve \fR[\fIPORT\fR]
Start the local web GUI on 127.0.0.1 (default port 8765) and open it in the
browser. Set the environment variable
.B AIS_NO_OPEN
to skip opening the browser and run headless: for an agent, a screenshot script
.RB ( tests/shot/ ),
or CI that drives the server and must not pop up a browser window.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
ais -v ~/photos/IMG_3920.jpg italy venice 2023
find ~/photos -name '*.jpg' | ais -v - italy venice 2023
ais italy venice
ais -o venice rome
ais --find gelato
ais -v "call Marina back"
ais gmail work -e
printf '%s' "$TOKEN" | ais api token -v - -e
ais recovery-codes github --doc -e < codes.txt
.fi
.SH FILES
These live inside the index directory (e.g.
.I .ais/
or the per-user default
.IR ~/.ais ):
.TP
.I store
Append-only records,
.IR id | ts | keys | value
(legacy v1 lines omit the
.I ts
field).
.TP
.I idx/<p>/<key>
Per-key posting lists (sorted record ids).
.TP
.I off
id->offset accelerator (rebuilt by compact; safe to delete).
.TP
.I multi
ids carrying more than one value line.
.TP
.I tomb
Tombstoned (deleted) ids.
.TP
.I blobs/<timestamp>.txt
Documents saved by
.B \-\-doc
(\fB.aisc\fR when encrypted; real data, not rebuildable).
.PP
Outside the index, in your home AIS dir:
.TP
.I ~/.ais/config
Plain-text config; an
.I index = PATH
line records the saved default index (see
.BR "ais \-\-default" ).
.SH SYNCING
For a one-shot copy between two devices on the same network with no setup, AIS has a
built-in encrypted transfer:
.B "ais \-\-export \-\-serve"
on one device prints a one-time token and an
.B \-\-import
command; run that on the other device to pull and merge (deletions included). It is
LAN-only and end-to-end encrypted (XChaCha20-Poly1305; the token never crosses the wire); cross-internet sync
stays a folder-sync tool's job.
.PP
For a two-way merge in which both devices converge in a single round, use
.B "ais \-\-sync \-\-serve"
on one device and
.B "ais \-\-sync \fIURL\fR \-\-token"
on the other. Unlike the one-shot
.B \-\-export
copy, changes flow in both directions (blobs included), by a tombstone-union,
timestamp last-writer-wins merge.
.PP
For continuous, hands-off syncing the index is just plain files, so it needs no cloud
account and no ais feature: point a folder-sync tool at the index directory, ignoring only
the per-device writer lock file
.RI ( lock ).
.B Syncthing
is recommended: peer-to-peer, open source, on Android and the desktops. The full
walkthrough (pairing, conflict handling, and one-shot alternatives like LocalSend) is in
.IR doc/SYNC.md .
.SH AUTHOR
Vasili Gavrilov.
.SH SEE ALSO
The project README, doc/SYNC.md, doc/dev/STYLE.md, doc/dev/LAYOUT.md.
